build/macosx/appbundler/README.md, before:

appbundler
=============

A fork of the [Java Application Bundler](https://svn.java.net/svn/appbundler~svn) 
with the following changes:

- The native binary is created as universal (32/64)
- Fixes [icon not showing bug](http://bugs.sun.com/bugdatabase/view_bug.do?bug_id=7159381) in `JavaAppLauncher`
- Adds `LC_CTYPE` environment variable to the `Info.plist` file in order to fix an [issue with `File.exists()` in OpenJDK 7](http://java.net/jira/browse/MACOSX_PORT-165)  **(Contributed by Steve Hannah)**
- Allows to specify the name of the executable instead of using the default `"JavaAppLauncher"` **(contributed by Karl von Randow)**
- Adds `classpathref` support to the `bundleapp` task
- Adds support for `JVMArchs` and `LSArchitecturePriority` keys
- Allows to specify a custom value for `CFBundleVersion` 
- Allows specifying registered file extensions using `CFBundleDocumentTypes`
- Passes to the Java application a set of environment variables with the paths of
  the OSX special folders and whether the application is running in the
  sandbox (see below).

These are the environment variables passed to the JVM:

- `LibraryDirectory`
- `DocumentsDirectory`
- `CachesDirectory`
- `ApplicationSupportDirectory`
- `SandboxEnabled` (the String `true` or `false`)


Example:

    <target name="bundle">
      <taskdef name="bundleapp" 
        classpath="appbundler-1.0ea.jar"
        classname="com.oracle.appbundler.AppBundlerTask"/>

      <bundleapp 
          classpathref="runclasspathref"
          outputdirectory="${dist}"
          name="${bundle.name}"
          displayname="${bundle.displayname}"
          executableName="MyApp"
          identifier="com.company.product"
          shortversion="${version.public}"
          version="${version.internal}"
          icon="${bundle.icon}"
          mainclassname="Main"
          copyright="2012 Your Company"
          applicationCategory="public.app-category.finance">
          
          <runtime dir="${runtime}/Contents/Home"/>

          <arch name="x86_64"/>
          <arch name="i386"/>

          <bundledocument extensions="png,jpg"
            icon="${bundle.icon}"
            name="Images"
            role="editor">
          </bundledocument> 

          <bundledocument extensions="pdf"
            icon="${bundle.icon}"
            name="PDF files"
            role="viewer">
          </bundledocument>

          <bundledocument extensions="custom"
            icon="${bundle.icon}"
            name="Custom data"
            role="editor"
            isPackage="true">
          </bundledocument>

          <!-- Workaround since the icon parameter for bundleapp doesn't work -->
          <option value="-Xdock:icon=Contents/Resources/${bundle.icon}"/>

          <option value="-Dapple.laf.useScreenMenuBar=true"/>
          <option value="-Dcom.apple.macos.use-file-dialog-packages=true"/>
          <option value="-Dcom.apple.macos.useScreenMenuBar=true"/>
          <option value="-Dcom.apple.mrj.application.apple.menu.about.name=${bundle.name}"/>
          <option value="-Dcom.apple.smallTabs=true"/>
          <option value="-Dfile.encoding=UTF-8"/>

          <option value="-Xmx1024M"/>
      </bundleapp>
    </target>

Commit message:

Add notes about our fork

build/macosx/appbundler/README.md, after:

appbundler
==========

This is a fork of the [infinitekind fork](https://bitbucket.org/infinitekind/appbundler) of Oracle's appbundler. 
(Many thanks for their additional work!) This fork covers several additional features (ability to remove JavaFX
binaries, a rewritten Info.plist writer, etc). See changes in the commits to this source.

What follows is the README from the [infinitekind fork](https://bitbucket.org/infinitekind/appbundler)

A fork of the [Java Application Bundler](https://svn.java.net/svn/appbundler~svn) 
with the following changes:

- The native binary is created as universal (32/64)
- Fixes [icon not showing bug](http://bugs.sun.com/bugdatabase/view_bug.do?bug_id=7159381) in `JavaAppLauncher`
- Adds `LC_CTYPE` environment variable to the `Info.plist` file in order to fix an [issue with `File.exists()` in OpenJDK 7](http://java.net/jira/browse/MACOSX_PORT-165)  **(Contributed by Steve Hannah)**
- Allows to specify the name of the executable instead of using the default `"JavaAppLauncher"` **(contributed by Karl von Randow)**
- Adds `classpathref` support to the `bundleapp` task
- Adds support for `JVMArchs` and `LSArchitecturePriority` keys
- Allows to specify a custom value for `CFBundleVersion` 
- Allows specifying registered file extensions using `CFBundleDocumentTypes`
- Passes to the Java application a set of environment variables with the paths of
  the OSX special folders and whether the application is running in the
  sandbox (see below).

These are the environment variables passed to the JVM:

- `LibraryDirectory`
- `DocumentsDirectory`
- `CachesDirectory`
- `ApplicationSupportDirectory`
- `SandboxEnabled` (the String `true` or `false`)


Example:

    <target name="bundle">
      <taskdef name="bundleapp" 
        classpath="appbundler-1.0ea.jar"
        classname="com.oracle.appbundler.AppBundlerTask"/>

      <bundleapp 
          classpathref="runclasspathref"
          outputdirectory="${dist}"
          name="${bundle.name}"
          displayname="${bundle.displayname}"
          executableName="MyApp"
          identifier="com.company.product"
          shortversion="${version.public}"
          version="${version.internal}"
          icon="${bundle.icon}"
          mainclassname="Main"
          copyright="2012 Your Company"
          applicationCategory="public.app-category.finance">
          
          <runtime dir="${runtime}/Contents/Home"/>

          <arch name="x86_64"/>
          <arch name="i386"/>

          <bundledocument extensions="png,jpg"
            icon="${bundle.icon}"
            name="Images"
            role="editor">
          </bundledocument> 

          <bundledocument extensions="pdf"
            icon="${bundle.icon}"
            name="PDF files"
            role="viewer">
          </bundledocument>

          <bundledocument extensions="custom"
            icon="${bundle.icon}"
            name="Custom data"
            role="editor"
            isPackage="true">
          </bundledocument>

          <!-- Workaround since the icon parameter for bundleapp doesn't work -->
          <option value="-Xdock:icon=Contents/Resources/${bundle.icon}"/>

          <option value="-Dapple.laf.useScreenMenuBar=true"/>
          <option value="-Dcom.apple.macos.use-file-dialog-packages=true"/>
          <option value="-Dcom.apple.macos.useScreenMenuBar=true"/>
          <option value="-Dcom.apple.mrj.application.apple.menu.about.name=${bundle.name}"/>
          <option value="-Dcom.apple.smallTabs=true"/>
          <option value="-Dfile.encoding=UTF-8"/>

          <option value="-Xmx1024M"/>
      </bundleapp>
    </target>
